---
title: "Why aren't Trump supporters worried about the Seal Team 6 Scenario? (Rejected from r/AskTrumpSupporters)"
name: "Dan Hicks"
date: "2024-07-15"
---

*This was originally written as a Reddit post on July 5, about a week after the Trump v. US decision.*

The "Seal Team 6 Scenario" is where the President orders an assassination of a political rival. Arguably, under the *Trump v. US* decision, this would fall within the President's "core powers" as Commander in Chief, and so would be immune from any criminal prosecution.  A lot of Trump opponents are worried about this scenario, but TS [Trump supporters] don't seem to be.  In the *Trump* decision, the majority just dismissed it as "hyperbolic," without actually refuting the argument. 

But it seems to me like TS *should* be worried about this kind of scenario:  

1. A lot of TS believe that Democratic political leaders are/have been/will be willing to use antidemocratic/tyrannical/authoritarian measures to secure power. 

2. *Trump v. US* allows things like political assassination. 

3. We have a Democratic president now, it's a live possibility that we'll have a Democratic president a year from now, and we'll almost certainly have a Democratic president sooner or later. 

4. So, from the perspective of a lot of TS, there's a live possibility that, sooner or later, a Democratic political leader will use political assassination to secure power. 

"Live possibility" doesn't mean it's especially likely, just that it's something that might foreseeably happen.  Like, if Biden only has a 25% chance of legitimately winning the election (1:3 odds), he's definitely not favored.  But his chances are way better than rolling snake eyes on a pair of dice (1:35 odds, about 3% chance) or drawing two pair in poker (about 5% chance).  

So if you're not worried about the Seal Team 6 Scenario, where's the misstep in my argument 1-4? 